<h1> Evaluating Time Series Models for Predicting Premium Swings between Smokers and Non-smokers</h1>
<h2> A spatial-temporal analysis on loss outcomes between two risk-differenced groups</h2>
  
<p>
  The affordability of whole life insurance has been a raising concern to families and children in different economic classes. We would like to take a time series approach to model the premiums received by the insurance companies in general or the amount of premiums paid by the policyholders. On one hand, this is important for life insurance companies to set rates and maintain adequate reserves to pay off the claims. On the other hand, premium rate has a pivotal indication on the economic well-being of the society such that during prospective economic times, people can afford rigid insurance rates, and during economic downturns they cannot. The “uslapseagent” dataset within the “CASdatasets” package is explored in this project. We do some exploratory data analysis and found that the annual premiums for smokers and non-smokers seem to decline from 2006 onward. Why? From an insurance perspective, the underwritting scheme after 2006 may be different. Underwritting is a process to determine the risk classes of policyholders. For instance, a person classified as “high-risk” before 2006 may be classified as “standard-risk” after 2006 and therefore get charged a “standard-risk” premium rate rather than a “high-risk” premium rate. From an economic perspective, people may be more aware of risky habits. For example, more people follow family habits of smoking before 2006, but after 2006, the society dynamics may have changed and people may be more cautious of such activity, thus lowering their risk status and their respective premium rates. Since the internal system (e.g. a company’s underwritting system) and external structure (e.g. society’s value and habits) are constantly changing, in a long run, it is hard to fixate our premium analyses solely on these parameters. Therefore, we take on a more consistent approach to estimate the annual premiums with respect to time. We would like to know are sudden swings in premium rates (e.g. the sudden downdrop after 2006) estimatable by time series models, and whether risk statuses (e.g. smoker and non-smoker) matter.

</p>
